The striker `` takes guard '' on a crease drawn on the pitch four feet in front of the wicket . 
The other batsman , known as the non-striker , waits at the opposite end of the pitch near the bowler . 
The bowler 's objectives are to prevent the scoring of runs and to dismiss the batsman . 
An over is a set of six deliveries bowled by the same bowler . 
The next over is bowled from the other end of the pitch by a different bowler . 
The sport is followed primarily in Australasia , Great Britain and Ireland , the Indian subcontinent , southern Africa and the West Indies . 
Women 's cricket , which is organised and played separately , has also achieved international standard . 
In Old French , the word `` criquet '' seems to have meant a kind of club or stick . 
Cricket remained a low-key local pursuit for much of the century . 
According to the social historian Derek Birley , there was a `` great upsurge of sport after the Restoration '' in 1660 . 
Along with prizefighting , horse racing and blood sports , cricket was perceived to be a gambling sport . 
The game underwent major development in the 18th century to become England 's national sport . 
MCC quickly became the sport 's premier club and the custodian of the Laws of Cricket . 
New Laws introduced in the latter part of the 18th century included the three stump wicket and leg before wicket -LRB- lbw -RRB- . 
The 19th century saw underarm bowling superseded by first roundarm and then overarm bowling . 
Both developments were controversial.Organisation of the game at county level led to the creation of the county clubs , starting with Sussex in 1839 . 
In December 1889 , the eight leading county clubs formed the official County Championship , which began in 1890 . 
The last two decades before the First World War have been called the `` Golden Age of cricket '' . 
In 1844 , the first-ever international match took place between the United States and Canada . 
In 1859 , a team of English players went to North America on the first overseas tour . 
In 1862 , an English team made the first tour of Australia . 
The rivalry between England and Australia gave birth to The Ashes in 1882 and this has remained Test cricket 's most famous contest . 
South Africa was banned from international cricket from 1970 to 1992 as part of the apartheid boycott . 
Cricket entered a new era in 1963 when English counties introduced the limited overs variant . 
In the 21st century , a new limited overs form , Twenty20 , made an immediate impact . 
There are 42 Laws -LRB- always written with a capital `` L '' -RRB- . 
Each wicket is made of three wooden stumps topped by two bails . 
The three stumps are aligned centrally on the bowling crease , which is eight feet eight inches long . 
